---
title: Using Xamrin-Fabulous in enterprise
date: 2020-06-28 21:00:00 +12:00
categories: [F#]
tags: [F#, .NETCore, AWS, Lambda]
description: F# static methods and .NET Core EntryPoint
# image: /assets/img/2020-06-13-client.png
published: false
---

## Providing some context

I work for a small-mid size company (~200 employees) that deals with compliance and tax compliance in transport industry. The company had a mobile app that replaced paper documents required in the trucking industry. The app was not in a good shape though and required a re-write. While the rest of the company used Java, this app was written in C# using Xamarin. The company had a newer app that also used C# with a tiny bit of F#. 

[Fabulous]() looked the perfect candidate for this new app. At the time though, Fabulous had not be out for long (this was the end of 2018). Also this would be a full app in F#, not just a bit on the side. How would the rest of the company feel?  

A plan was hatched. 

## One year of development

Before kicking off full-scale development, two-weeks were put aside to build a prototype app as a proof-of-concept (POC). The POC provided a significant benefit in redudcing the risk of the development. The POC highlighted a few key areas where fabulous was lacking. The POC was demonstrated to a few non-techncial people. 

All-in-all it went really well, and Fabulous was selected to proceed with. 

What followed then was several months of Xamarin development with Fabulous building out the mobile app. 


## Technical challenges


## Team members

## Compnay response